First draft of blog post for Flask SCIM server with Okta (#830)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2021-07-14-flask-scim-server.md

### What you'll need

- [virtualenv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
- [ngrok](https://ngrok.com/)

### Setting up the Flask server and Postgres DB 
{% img blog/flask-scim-server/flask_postgres.png alt:"PostgreSQL and Flask Logos Image" width:"500" %}

1.  Clone the repo found [here](https://github.com/Tennyx/flask-scim-server), open terminal and `cd` into the project root.
2.  Create a new virtualenv in the root folder with `virtualenv env`
3.  Run the virtual environment with `source env/bin/activate`
4.  Install necessary Python packages with ```pip install -r requirements.txt```

> 5.  Create a new Postgres database named `scim`. Enter the `psql` shell by opening a new terminal tab and typing `psql postgres`. Create the DB with `CREATE DATABASE scim;` (Run `\l` to double-check the database has been created)

Reviewer: I recommend that you add a suggestion for how to install PostgreSQL. Brew? Installer? Etc

> 5.  Create a new Postgres database named `scim`. Enter the `psql` shell by opening a new terminal tab and typing `psql postgres`. Create the DB with `CREATE DATABASE scim;` (Run `\l` to double-check the database has been created)

Reviewer: I suggest using the long form of the commands. For example `\list` instead of `\l`. I know that the long forms take longer to type, but the long form commands make it clear to new readers what exactly they will be doing.

6.  Go back to the terminal tab that is in the flask app root. Run the following commands to create migrations and tables in the ```scim``` database:

>     - `python manage.py db init`

Reviewer: FYI, when I ran this command, I got this error:

```
$ python manage.py db init
/Users/joel/Projects/flask-scim-server/venv/lib/python3.8/site-packages/flask_sqlalchemy/__init__.py:833: FSADeprecationWarning: SQLALCHEMY_TRACK_MODIFICATIONS adds significant overhead and will be disabled by default in the future.  Set it to True or False to suppress this warning.
  warnings.warn(FSADeprecationWarning(
  Creating directory /Users/joel/Projects/flask-scim-server/migrations ...  done
  Creating directory /Users/joel/Projects/flask-scim-server/migrations/versions ...  done
  Generating /Users/joel/Projects/flask-scim-server/migrations/script.py.mako ...  done
  Generating /Users/joel/Projects/flask-scim-server/migrations/env.py ...  done
  Generating /Users/joel/Projects/flask-scim-server/migrations/README ...  done
  Generating /Users/joel/Projects/flask-scim-server/migrations/alembic.ini ...  done
  Please edit configuration/connection/logging settings in '/Users/joel/Projects/flask-scim-server/migrations/alembic.ini' before proceeding.
```

Author: Thanks for catching! I fixed this based off the following solution: https://stackoverflow.com/a/33790196/8025504

    - ```python manage.py db migrate```
    - ```python manage.py db upgrade```
    
    > Feel free to hop back to your postgres tab and run ```\c scim``` to navigate into the scim db, then ```\dt``` to see your new tables: ```groups```, ```users```, ```link```. (Link is a table facilitating the many-to-many relationship between users and groups)

7. Everything should be setup now to run the server locally. Finally run ```python app.py``` to do so. You should now have your SCIM server running on http://localhost:5000.

### Setting up ngrok to route requests from Okta to localhost

> Once you have ngrok installed, run ```./ngrok http 5000``` to create a tunnel from ngrok to your http://localhost:5000. Copy the ```https``` Forwarding URL created by ngrok as you will need it later.

Reviewer: Agreed with @bdemers - it took me a few seconds to get what you meant by "Copy the `https` forwarding URL" ... a screenshot would have made this very clear.

### Creating and configuring your Okta Application

> Now it's time to create a new SCIM integration in Okta. If your SCIM app(s) are already setup on the Okta side, feel free to skip ahead to [**Test the SCIM Server**](/blog/2021/07/09/flask-scim-server#test-the-scim-server). There are two options that will work with this server, and I will ALWAYS recommend the first, which is using an Okta SCIM template application.

Reviewer: I ran into this issue too.

#### Option 1: SCIM Template App

1. In your Okta dashboard, go to **Applications** -> **Applications**, then click the **Browse App Catalogue** button. Search for **SCIM 2.0 Test App (Header Auth)** and click the **Add** button once you have it pulled up.
2. In the **General Settings** tab, click **Next**.
3. We will set this up as a SWA application, so in the **Sign-On Options** tab, click **Secure Web Authentication**.
4. Click **Done**.
5. Tab over to **Provisioning** and click **Configure API Integration.**
6. Check **Enable API integration**.
7. In the Base URL field, paste in the ngrok url you generated above with **/scim/v2** appended to the end. In the API Token field, type **Bearer 123456789**. (Later on we will go over how to customize this auth header, but out-of-the-box, the SCIM server expects this value)
8. Click Test API Credentials and you should get a success message like the below:

    {% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_1.png alt:"Test Api Credentials UI Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

>     > You can navigate to `http://localhost:4040` to see the request from Okta on this request, as well as the response from the SCIM server.

Reviewer: Agreed

    {% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_2.png alt:"Test Api Credentials Call Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

9. Click **Save**. Now your **Provisoning** tab will look a bit different.

10. Click **Edit** next to **Provisioning to App** and check off:
    - Create Users
    - Update User Attributes
    - Deactivate Users
    
And **Save**.

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_3.png alt:"Provisioning Settings Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> #### Option 2: Enable SCIM Provisioning for Existing AIW App

Reviewer: Same

> #### Option 2: Enable SCIM Provisioning for Existing AIW App

Reviewer: Yeah, change AIW to App Integration Wizard

    - Create Users
    - Update User Attributes
    - Deactivate Users
    
And **Save**.

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_7.png alt:"AIW Provisioning Settings Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

You should now be set on the Okta side to start testing the SCIM server.

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/frodo.webp alt:"AIW Provisioning Settings Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

### What did we just do?

Before we go ahead and test our SCIM server, let's talk a bit about what we did in the setup steps above. Essentially we setup the following 3 components:

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/flow_1.png alt:"SCIM FLow IMage" width:"1000" %}{: .center-image }

In this setup, Okta is the source of truth for user data. The SCIM server opens up four endpoints locally which Okta is able to access thanks to the routing capabilities of ngrok. These endpoints are:

- `https://localhost:5000/scim/v2/Users`
- `https://localhost:5000/scim/v2/Users/{user_id}`
- `https://localhost:5000/scim/v2/Groups`
- `https://localhost:5000/scim/v2/Groups/{group_id}`

These endpoints trigger CRUD operations based off the requests from Okta. Some examples of these calls:

#### CREATE

Okta Examples:

> - Assigning users to Okta app (`POST` to `/scim/v2/Users`)

Reviewer: I suggest spelling this out more explicitly. For example, instead of the text above, use this:

> When a user is assigned to the app, Okta will make `POST` to `/scim/v2/Users`

- Assigning groups to Okta app (Iterative `POST`s to `/scim/v2/Users`)
- Using Push Groups to add a new group to the Okta app (`POST` to `/scim/v2/Groups`)

#### READ

Okta Examples:

- Importing users & groups from external app (`GET` to `/scim/v2/Users` & `GET` to `/scim/v2/Groups`)
- Get users from external app (`GET` to `/scim/v2/Users`)
- Get user from external app (`GET` to `/scim/v2/Users/{user_id}`)
- Get groups from external app (`GET` to `/scim/v2/Groups`)
- Get group from external app (`GET` to `/scim/v2/Groups/{group_id}`)

> > With the exception of import, these READ actions are initiated by Okta prior to a CREATE, UPDATE or DELETE actions. You can think of these calls as a sync verification step.

Reviewer: Suggest changing the above to:

> With the exception of import, these actions are initiated by Okta prior to a CREATE, UPDATE or DELETE action. You can think of these calls as a sync verification step.

- Change membership of pushed Okta group (`PUT` or `PATCH` to `/scim/v2/Groups/{group_id}`)

#### DELETE

Okta Examples:

- Selecting "Delete the group in target app" after selecting "Unlink pushed group" in the **Push Groups** tab. (`DELETE` to `/scim/v2/Groups/{group_id}`)

Let's move on to testing the SCIM server to see some of these calls in action!

### Test the SCIM Server
>**Note**: I am using the SCIM template integration in the below steps. If you are using the AIW version, there may be subtle differences in some of the calls. More info [here](https://developer.okta.com/docs/reference/scim/scim-20/).

- Navigate to `http://localhost:4040` to see all the requests and responses taking place between Okta and the SCIM server. I will be truncating mine a bit in the below examples for brevity.

- From the section above, you saw that we setup our SCIM integration with **Bearer 123456789** in the authorization header. You can change this header to whatever you'd like in the **app.py** file at the following line of function **auth_required**:

`if request.headers['Authorization'].split('Bearer ')[1] == '123456789':`

> Replace '123456789' with whatever unique value you'd like and make sure to update this in the provisioning tab of your Okta integrations.

Reviewer: Change `'123456789'` to `123456789` to make it clear that the contents of the single quoted string are what should be changed versus the entire thing.

>Authentication exists to protect your endpoints from unwanted requests. In this guide we setup header authorization, but you can also use basic auth or OAuth. This tutorial doesn't delve too deeply into this aspect of SCIM.

#### Assign a User

> Under the **Assignments** tab, click **Assign** -> **Assign to People**. I assigned user **obi-wan.kenobi@iamciam.dev**. Here is a look at the requests and responses from Okta to my SCIM server:

Reviewer: Agreed, with a further comment that the danger of using a domain like `iamciam.dev` is that someone else (a competitor, usually) can register the domain name if it isn't registered now, or becomes unregistered in the future.

> Under the **Assignments** tab, click **Assign** -> **Assign to People**. I assigned user **obi-wan.kenobi@iamciam.dev**. Here is a look at the requests and responses from Okta to my SCIM server:

Author: I own this domain, I use it for my custom URL Okta domain.

        "familyName": "Kenobi"
    },
    "emails": [
        {
            "primary": true,
            "value": "obi-wan.kenobi@iamciam.dev",
            "type": "work"
        }
    ],
    "displayName": "Obi-Wan Kenobi",
    "locale": "en-US",
    "externalId": "00use6vjvehodmsQb4x6",
    "groups": [],
    "password": "gl^m&qWZ",
    "active": true
}
```
 - *SCIM Server Response:*
```
201 CREATED
```
```
{
    "active": true,
    "displayName": "Obi-Wan Kenobi",
    "emails": [
        {
            "primary": true,
            "type": "work",
            "value": "obi-wan.kenobi@iamciam.dev"
        }
    ],
    "externalId": "00use6vjvehodmsQb4x6",
    "groups": [],
    "id": "289383d9-ff3a-48bb-99ea-3048762267c7",
    "locale": "en-US",
    "meta": {
        "resourceType": "User"
    },
    "name": {
        "familyName": "Kenobi",
        "givenName": "Obi-Wan",
        "middleName": null
    },
    "schemas": [
        "urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User"
    ],
    "userName": "obi-wan.kenobi@iamciam.dev"
}
```

- Now If you navigate to your local **scim** database and run `select * from users;`, you should see the assigned user in the database.

> {% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_8.png alt:"Database New User Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Author: It looks like maybe SSs may work out better. The text is so big in a code block that it has a horizontal scroll bar (which I couldn't scroll btw!)

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Okta, SCIM and Flask"
author: cale-switzer
by: advocate
communities: [python]
description: "Using a Flask SCIM server, learn more about the how & why behind how Okta implements the provisioning protocol."
tags: [scim, python, flask]
tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""
image:
type: awareness
---

> At a very high level, the SCIM (System for Cross-Identity Management) protocol exists to provision and sync users and groups across various, independent systems. There is some room for nuance in the [SCIM spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7644). In this post we will take a look at some basic SCIM operations and what the flow looks like under the hood between Okta and a SCIM server built in Flask using PostgreSQL as our app database. Even if you're not a Python dev, hopefully you can take away some of the concepts in this guide for your own SCIM implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At a very high level, the SCIM (System for Cross-Identity Management) protocol exists to provision and sync users and groups across various, independent systems. There is some room for nuance in the [SCIM spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7644). In this post we will take a look at some basic SCIM operations. We'll peek under the hood at the flow between Okta and a SCIM server built in Flask using PostgreSQL as our app database. Even if you're not a Python dev, hopefully you can take away some of the concepts in this guide for your own SCIM implementation.
```
2 sentences for readability

> ### What you'll need

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What You'll Need
```
we'e using title case in top-level headers

Author: yeesh - my bad! Brian corrected me on one of my titles above and I should've applied the changes to all of my titles.

- [virtualenv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
- [ngrok](https://ngrok.com/)

> ### Setting up the Flask server and Postgres DB 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Setting Up the Flask Server and Postgres DB 
```
title case

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/flask_postgres.png alt:"PostgreSQL and Flask Logos Image" width:"500" %}

1.  Clone the repo found [here](https://github.com/Tennyx/flask-scim-server), open terminal and `cd` into the project root.

> 2.  Create a new virtualenv in the root folder with `virtualenv env`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2.  Create a new virtualenv in the root folder with `virtualenv env`.
```
consistent punctuation

> 3.  Run the virtual environment with `source env/bin/activate`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3.  Run the virtual environment with `source env/bin/activate`
```
```suggestion
3.  Run the virtual environment with `source env/bin/activate`.
```
punctuation

> 4.  Install necessary Python packages with ```pip install -r requirements.txt```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4.  Install necessary Python packages with ```pip install -r requirements.txt```.
```
punctuation

5.  Install [Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/download/).

> 6.  Create a new Postgres database named `scim`. Enter the `psql` shell by opening a new terminal tab and typing `psql postgres`. Create the DB with `CREATE DATABASE scim;` (Run `\list` to double-check the database has been created)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6.  Create a new Postgres database named `scim`. Enter the `psql` shell by opening a new terminal tab and typing `psql postgres`. Create the DB with `CREATE DATABASE scim;` (Run `\list` to double-check the database has been created).
```
punc.

7.  Go back to the terminal tab that is in the flask app root. Run the following commands to create migrations and tables in the `scim` database:
    - `python manage.py db init`
    - `python manage.py db migrate`
    - `python manage.py db upgrade`
    

>     > Feel free to hop back to your postgres tab and run `\c scim` to navigate into the scim db, then `\dt` to see your new tables: `groups`, `users`, `link`. (Link is a table facilitating the many-to-many relationship between users and groups)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    > Feel free to hop back to your Postgres tab and run `\c scim` to navigate into the scim db, then `\dt` to see your new tables: `groups`, `users`, `link`. (Link is a table facilitating the many-to-many relationship between users and groups)
```
Capitalize Postgres

> 8. Everything should be setup now to run the server locally. Finally, run `python app.py` to do so. You should now have your SCIM server running on http://localhost:5000.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. Everything should be set up now to run the server locally. Finally, run `python app.py` to do so. You should now have your SCIM server running on http://localhost:5000.
```

When setup is a verb it is 2 words: set up

### Set Up Ngrok to Route Requests From Okta to Localhost

Once you have ngrok installed, run `./ngrok http 5000` to create a tunnel from ngrok to your `http://localhost:5000`. Copy the `https` Forwarding URL created by ngrok as you will need it later.

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/ngrok_url.png alt:"ngrok forwarding URL" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> ### Creating and configuring your Okta Application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Creating and Configuring Your Okta Application
```
title case

> Now it's time to create a new SCIM integration in Okta. If your SCIM app(s) are already setup on the Okta side, feel free to skip ahead to [**Test the SCIM Server**](#test-the-scim-server). There are two options that will work with this server, and I will ALWAYS recommend the first, which is using an Okta SCIM template application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now it's time to create a new SCIM integration in Okta. If your SCIM app(s) are already set up on the Okta side, feel free to skip ahead to [**Test the SCIM Server**](#test-the-scim-server). There are two options that will work with this server, and I will ALWAYS recommend the first, which is to use an Okta SCIM template application.
```
clarity

#### Option 1: SCIM Template App

1. In your Okta dashboard, go to **Applications** -> **Applications**, then click the **Browse App Catalogue** button. Search for **SCIM 2.0 Test App (Header Auth)** and click the **Add** button once you have it pulled up.
2. In the **General Settings** tab, click **Next**.
3. We will set this up as a SWA application, so in the **Sign-On Options** tab, click **Secure Web Authentication**.
4. Click **Done**.
5. Tab over to **Provisioning** and click **Configure API Integration.**
6. Check **Enable API integration**.

> 7. In the Base URL field, paste in the ngrok url you generated above with **/scim/v2** appended to the end. In the API Token field, type **Bearer 123456789**. (Later on we will go over how to customize this auth header, but out-of-the-box, the SCIM server expects this value)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. In the Base URL field, paste in the ngrok url you generated above with **/scim/v2** appended to the end. In the API Token field, type **Bearer 123456789**. (Later on we will go over how to customize this auth header, but out-of-the-box, the SCIM server expects this value.)
```
period. end of sentence.

    {% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_2.png alt:"Test Api Credentials Call Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

9. Click **Save**. Now your **Provisoning** tab will look a bit different.

10. Click **Edit** next to **Provisioning to App** and check off:
    - **Create Users**
    - **Update User Attributes**
    - **Deactivate Users**
    
And **Save**.

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_3.png alt:"Provisioning Settings Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

#### Option 2: Enable SCIM Provisioning for Existing App Integration Wizard (AIW) App

> Feel free to skip over this section to **Test the SCIM Server** if you set your SCIM integration up above.

1. In your Okta dashboard, go to **Applications** -> **Applications**, then click the **Create App Integration** button. For this setup we will select **SWA - Secure Web Authentication**. Click **Next**.
2. You can put whatever you'd like for the **App Name** and **App Login Page URL**, as we will just be loking at the SCIM functionality and not the SWA aspect of this app. Click **Finish**.
3. In the **General** tab of the app, click **Edit** and toggle Provisioning from **None** to **SCIM**. Click **Save**.

> 4. Your app should now have a **Provisioning** tab. Tab over to it and fill out the integration settings like the below image. Make the Authorization header **123456789**. You can change this later in the SCIM flask app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Your app should now have a **Provisioning** tab. Tab over to it and fill out the integration settings to match those in the image below. Make the Authorization header **123456789**. You can change this later in the SCIM flask app.
```
avoid "below" as an adjective.

    {% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_4.png alt:"AIW SCIM Settings Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

5. Click **Test Connector Configuration** and you should see the following success confirmation:

    {% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_5.png alt:"Test Connector Configuration UI Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> 6. At which point, you can now click **Save**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. You can now click **Save**.
```
minimize

    > You can navigate to `http://localhost:4040` to see the request from Okta on this request, as well as the response from the SCIM server.

    {% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_6.png alt:"Test Connector Configuration Call Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

7. Now your **Provisoning** tab will look a bit different. Click **Edit** next to **Provisioning to App** and check off:
    - Create Users
    - Update User Attributes
    - Deactivate Users
    
And **Save**.

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_7.png alt:"AIW Provisioning Settings Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

You should now be set on the Okta side to start testing the SCIM server.

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/frodo.webp alt:"AIW Provisioning Settings Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> ### What did we just do?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What Did We Just Do?
```
title case

> Before we go ahead and test our SCIM server, let's talk a bit about what we did in the setup steps above. Essentially we setup the following 3 components:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we go ahead and test our SCIM server, let's talk a bit about what we did in the setup steps above. Essentially we set up the following 3 components:
```
setup vs set up

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/flow_1.png alt:"SCIM FLow IMage" width:"1000" %}{: .center-image }

> In this setup, Okta is the source of truth for user data. The SCIM server opens up four endpoints locally which Okta is able to access thanks to the routing capabilities of ngrok. These endpoints are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this setup, Okta is the source of truth for user data. The SCIM server opens up four endpoints locally, which Okta is able to access thanks to the routing capabilities of ngrok. These endpoints are:
```

comma usu precedes which

- When getting a sole user from the external app, Okta sends a `GET` to `/scim/v2/Users/{user_id}`
- When getting all (or filtered) groups from the external app, Okta sends a`GET` to `/scim/v2/Groups`
- When getting a sole group from the external app, Okta sends a`GET` to `/scim/v2/Groups/{group_id}`

> With the exception of import, these actions are initiated by Okta prior to a CREATE, UPDATE or DELETE action. You can think of these calls as a sync verification step.

#### UPDATE

Okta Examples:

- When updating user attributes in Okta, Okta sends a `PUT` or `PATCH` to `/scim/v2/Users/{user_id}`
- When assigning or unassigning a user that already exists in external app DB, Okta sends a `PUT` or `PATCH` to `/scim/v2/Users/{user_id}`
- When changing membership of a pushed Okta group, Okta sends a `PUT` or `PATCH` to `/scim/v2/Groups/{group_id}`

#### DELETE

Okta Examples:

- When selecting "Delete the group in target app" after selecting "Unlink pushed group" in the **Push Groups** tab, okta sends a `DELETE` to `/scim/v2/Groups/{group_id}`

Let's move on to testing the SCIM server to see some of these calls in action!

<a name="test-the-scim-server"/>
### Test the SCIM Server

> >**Note**: I am using the SCIM template integration in the below steps. If you are using the AIW version, there may be subtle differences in some of the calls. More info [here](https://developer.okta.com/docs/reference/scim/scim-20/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Note**: I am using the SCIM template integration in the steps below. If you are using the AIW version, there may be subtle differences in some of the calls. More info [here](https://developer.okta.com/docs/reference/scim/scim-20/).
```
styleguide

> - Navigate to `http://localhost:4040` to see all the requests and responses taking place between Okta and the SCIM server. I will be truncating mine a bit in the below examples for brevity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Navigate to `http://localhost:4040` to see all the requests and responses taking place between Okta and the SCIM server. I will be truncating mine a bit in the examples below for brevity.
```
styleguide

> - From the section above, you saw that we setup our SCIM integration with **Bearer 123456789** in the authorization header. You can change this header to whatever you'd like in the **app.py** file at the following line of function **auth_required**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- From the section above, you saw that we set up our SCIM integration with **Bearer 123456789** in the authorization header. You can change this header to whatever you'd like in the **app.py** file at the following line of function **auth_required**:
```

`if request.headers['Authorization'].split('Bearer ')[1] == '123456789':`

Replace 123456789 with whatever unique value you'd like and make sure to update this in the provisioning tab of your Okta integrations.

>**Note**: This is just for convenience in testing - NEVER store sensitive credentials in source code. More info [here](https://developer.okta.com/books/api-security/api-keys/keep-keys-private/#api-keys-keep-keys-private).

> >Authentication exists to protect your endpoints from unwanted requests. In this guide we setup header authorization, but you can also use basic auth or OAuth. This tutorial doesn't delve too deeply into this aspect of SCIM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>Authentication exists to protect your endpoints from unwanted requests. In this guide we set up header authorization, but you can also use basic auth or OAuth. This tutorial doesn't delve too deeply into this aspect of SCIM.
```

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_8.png alt:"Database New User Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

#### Unassign a User

Let's go ahead and unassign the user we just assigned in Okta. Under **Assignments**, click the **X** next to the user we just assigned:

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_9.png alt:"UI Unassign User Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

The request/response should look like this:
 - *Okta Request:*
```http
PATCH /scim/v2/Users/289383d9-ff3a-48bb-99ea-3048762267c7
```
```json
{
    "schemas": [
        "urn:ietf:params:scim:api:messages:2.0:PatchOp"
    ],
    "Operations": [
        {
            "op": "replace",
            "value": {
                "active": false
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

> Okta does not delete an unassigned user but rather updates their `active` value to `false`.

 - *SCIM Server Response:*
```http
204 NO CONTENT
```

- And sure enough, if you run that same `select * from users;` in the scim db, you will see the user is now `active: false`:

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_10.png alt:"Database Inactive User Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

#### Assign a Group

> Under the **Assignments** tab, click **Assign** -> **Assign to Groups**. I assigned group **Droids**. Note that this acts similar to the above assigning of individual users. Okta will iterate through the group membership and create them in the external SCIM server - but the Group itself won't be made. That is done in **Push Groups** which we will handle later. Here is a look at the requests and responses from Okta to the SCIM server:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Under the **Assignments** tab, click **Assign** -> **Assign to Groups**. I assigned group **Droids**. Note that this behavior is similar to the way individual users were assigned above. Okta will iterate through the group membership and create the users in the external SCIM server - but the Group itself won't be made. That is done in **Push Groups** which we will handle later. Here is a look at the requests and responses from Okta to the SCIM server:
```

clarifying language

```http
POST /scim/v2/Users
```
```json
{
    "schemas": [
        "urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User"
    ],
    "userName": "c-3po@iamciam.dev",
    "name": {
        "givenName": "C",
        "familyName": "3PO"
    },
    "emails": [
        {
            "primary": true,
            "value": "c-3po@iamciam.dev",
            "type": "work"
        }
    ],
    "displayName": "C 3PO",
    "locale": "en-US",
    "externalId": "00usemeo53HWWPYy14x6",
    "groups": [],
    "password": "wA&&cprB",
    "active": true
}
```
 - *SCIM Server Response:*
```http
201 CREATED
```
```json
{
    "active": true,
    "displayName": "C 3PO",
    "emails": [
        {
            "primary": true,
            "type": "work",
            "value": "c-3po@iamciam.dev"
        }
    ],
    "externalId": "00usemeo53HWWPYy14x6",
    "groups": [],
    "id": "478c4cf4-1aa3-41a1-93da-4c154c5955e0",
    "locale": "en-US",
    "meta": {
        "resourceType": "User"
    },
    "name": {
        "familyName": "3PO",
        "givenName": "C",
        "middleName": null
    },
    "schemas": [
        "urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User"
    ],
    "userName": "c-3po@iamciam.dev"
}
```

> - There are 3 members in my **Droids** group: C-3P0, R2-D2 and BB-8. The above req/resp chain repeats for the other 2 users. Now when I run `select * from users;` in the scim database I can see the assigned users:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- There are 3 members in my **Droids** group: C-3P0, R2-D2, and BB-8. The above req/resp chain repeats for the other 2 users. Now when I run `select * from users;` in the scim database I can see the assigned users:
```
serial comma

{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_11.png alt:"Database Assigned Users Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

#### Push Groups

> As mentioned above, assigning a group in Okta only adds the users to my SCIM server, not the Group itself. **Push Groups** is an Okta-specific functionality that allows the granularity to assign Okta group members to a SCIM application without automatically adding that group to the external app. More info can be found [here](https://help.okta.com/en/prod/Content/Topics/users-groups-profiles/usgp-about-group-push.htm) In order to add a Group to our external app, tab over to **Push Groups** in your Okta app integration. Click **Push Groups** -> **Find groups by name** and select the group you assigned above. Make sure **Push group memberships immediately** is checked and click **Save**. Two calls should be made by Okta - one creating the group itself and another updating the group membership. Here are the requests and responses for my Droids group push:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, assigning a group in Okta only adds the users to my SCIM server, not the Group itself. **Push Groups** is an Okta-specific functionality. It gives you the granularity to assign Okta group members to a SCIM application without automatically adding that group to the external app. More info can be found [here](https://help.okta.com/en/prod/Content/Topics/users-groups-profiles/usgp-about-group-push.htm) In order to add a Group to our external app, tab over to **Push Groups** in your Okta app integration. Click **Push Groups** -> **Find groups by name** and select the group you assigned above. Make sure **Push group memberships immediately** is checked and click **Save**. Two calls should be made by Okta - one creating the group itself and another updating the group membership. Here are the requests and responses for my Droids group push:
```
clarifying

---
layout: blog_post

> title: "Okta, SCIM and Flask"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "How to Build a Flask SCIM Server Configured for Use with Okta"
```

author: cale-switzer
by: advocate
communities: [python]
description: "Using a Flask SCIM server, learn more about the how & why behind how Okta implements the provisioning protocol."
tags: [scim, python, flask]
tweets:

> - ""

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "Want to learn how Okta implements the SCIM provisioning protocol? What better way than setting up your own SCIM server with Flask!"
- "Take a peek under the hood to see #SCIM in action. Learn how to build a SCIM server with #Flask, #Postgres, and #Okta. #python" 
```

- ""
- ""
image:
type: awareness
---

At a very high level, the SCIM (System for Cross-Identity Management) protocol exists to provision and sync users and groups across various, independent systems. There is some room for nuance in the [SCIM spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7644). In this post we will take a look at some basic SCIM operations. We'll peek under the hood at the flow between Okta and a SCIM server built in Flask using PostgreSQL as our app database. Even if you're not a Python dev, hopefully you can take away some of the concepts in this guide for your own SCIM implementation.

### What You'll Need

- [virtualenv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
- [ngrok](https://ngrok.com/)

### Setting Up the Flask Server and Postgres DB 
{% img blog/flask-scim-server/flask_postgres.png alt:"PostgreSQL and Flask Logos Image" width:"500" %}

> 1.  Clone the repo found [here](https://github.com/Tennyx/flask-scim-server), open terminal and `cd` into the project root.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1.  Clone the repo found [here](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-scim-flask-example), open terminal and `cd` into the project root.
```

 - *Okta Request:*

```http
POST /scim/v2/Groups
```

```json
{
    "schemas": [
        "urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Group"
    ],
    "displayName": "Droids",
    "members": [
        {
            "value": "cc2573a1-e1c4-491d-a3db-ae4a2e078d61",
            "display": "bb-8@iamciam.dev"
        },
        {
            "value": "478c4cf4-1aa3-41a1-93da-4c154c5955e0",
            "display": "c-3po@iamciam.dev"
        },
        {
            "value": "34e14e58-f0fe-4e9d-aeb2-0da25fa6626d",
            "display": "r2-d2@iamciam.dev"
        }

>     ]
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ]
 }
```
```

        }
    ]
}
```

 - *SCIM Server Response:*

 ```http
 200 OK
 ```
 
 ```json
 {
    "displayName": "Droids",
    "id": "b446521a-a65b-4c0b-a5ee-0a15e8e3e908",
    "members": [
        {
            "display": "c-3po@iamciam.dev",
            "value": "478c4cf4-1aa3-41a1-93da-4c154c5955e0"
        },
        {
            "display": "bb-8@iamciam.dev",
            "value": "cc2573a1-e1c4-491d-a3db-ae4a2e078d61"
        },
        {
            "display": "r2-d2@iamciam.dev",
            "value": "34e14e58-f0fe-4e9d-aeb2-0da25fa6626d"
        }
    ],
    "meta": {
        "resourceType": "Group"
    },
    "schemas": [
        "urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Group"
    ]
 }
 ```
 
And with this, you should now see your group in the scim database after running `select * from groups;`:
 
{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_12.png alt:"Database Groups Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }
 
 As well as a link table which displays the many-to-many relationship between the users and groups. You can see this with `select * from link;`:
 
{% img blog/flask-scim-server/scim_13.png alt:"Database Link Table Image" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }
 
### In Conclusion

> This covers the basic functionality of SCIM integration from Okta. Other use-cases haven't been tested extensively and may need tweaking over time, but hopefully this guide helps developers to better understand Okta's SCIM functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This covers the basic functionality of SCIM integration from Okta. Other use cases haven't been tested extensively and may need tweaking over time, but hopefully, this guide helps developers to better understand Okta's SCIM functionality.

Got questions? You can leave them in the comments below! Want to stay in touch? Follow our social channels: [@oktadev on Twitter](https://twitter.com/oktadev), [Okta for Developers on LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/company/oktadev), [Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/oktadev), and [YouTube](https://youtube.com/oktadev). 
```

Added the "follow us" call to action, also removed dash from "use case"
